The United States officially recognized the independence of Ukraine on December 25, 1991.
The United States upgraded its consulate in the capital, Kyiv, to embassy status on January 21,
1992. In 2002, relations between the United States and Ukraine deteriorated after one of the
recordings made during the Cassette Scandal revealed an alleged transfer of a sophisticated
Ukrainian defense system to Saddam Hussein's Iraq. Following the 2014 annexation of Crimea by the
Russian Federation, the USA became one of the largest defense partners of Ukraine.

The current ambassador of the United States to Ukraine is Bridget A. Brink. The current Ukrainian
Ambassador to the United States is Oksana Markarova.

As of 2009, the United States supports Ukraine's bid to join NATO.

According to documents uncovered during the United States diplomatic cables leak, American
diplomats defends Ukrainian sovereignty in meetings with other diplomats.

Ukrainians have generally viewed the U.S. positively, with 80% expressing a favorable view in
2002, and 60% in 2011. According to the 2012 U.S. Global Leadership Report, 33% of Ukrainians
approve of U.S. leadership, with 26% disapproving and 41% uncertain.

In the wake of Russia's annexation of Crimea, the United States began to supply military aid to
Ukraine. This continued after the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine with the US massively
increasing its supply of military aid, with US President Joe Biden heavily condemning the invasion
and pledging support to Ukraine.

The United States enjoys cordially friendly and strategic relations with Ukraine and attaches
great importance to the success of Ukraine's transition to a democracy with a flourishing market
economy. Following a period of economic decline characterized by high inflation
and a continued reliance on state controls, the Ukrainian government began taking steps in the
fall of 1999 to reinvigorate economic reform that had been stalled for years due to a lack of a
reform majority in the Ukrainian parliament. The Ukrainian government's stated determination to
implement comprehensive economic reform is a welcome development in the eyes of the US government,
and the U.S. is committed to supporting Ukraine in continuing on this path. Bilateral relations
suffered a setback in September 2002 when the federal government of the U.S. announced it had
authenticated a recording of President Leonid Kuchma's July 2000 decision to transfer a Kolchuga
early warning system to Iraq. The Government of Ukraine denied that the transfer had occurred.
Ukraine's democratic Orange Revolution has led to closer cooperation and more open dialogue
between Ukraine and the United States. U.S. policy remains centered on realizing and strengthening
a democratic, prosperous, a primary recipient of FSA assistance. Total U.S. assistance since
independence has been more than $3 billion. U.S. assistance to Ukraine is targeted to promote
political and economic reform and to address urgent humanitarian needs. The U.S. has consistently
encouraged Ukraine's transition to a democratic society with a prosperous market-based economy.

In November 2006, the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) selected Ukraine to be eligible to
apply for compact assistance. Ukraine already participates in the MCC Threshold Program, and in
December 2006 signed a $45 million Threshold Program agreement. This program, which began
implementation in early 2007, aims to reduce corruption in the public sector through civil
society monitoring and advocacy, judicial reform, increased government monitoring and enforcement
of ethical and administrative standards, streamlining and enforcing regulations, and combating
corruption in higher education. Ukraine is beginning the process of developing a Compact proposal,
and successful implementation of the Threshold Program will be necessary before the MCC will enter
into a Compact with Ukraine.

The U.S. maintains an embassy in the Ukrainian capital Kyiv, and Ukraine maintains an embassy in
the American capital Washington, D.C.

In addition to diplomatic support in its conflict with Russia, the U.S. provided Ukraine with
US$1.5 billion in military aid from 2014 to 2019. In 2021, The Sunday Times reported that the
amount of military aid given was US$2.5 billion.

In January 2022, the U.S. put 5,000–8,500 troops on high alert as tensions escalated in the
Russo-Ukrainian War, expressing willingness to further help defend Ukraine before and when
Russia launched its invasion a month later. The United States provided nearly $1 billion in
military aid to Ukraine in 2021 and 2022, up to the first week of the invasion. Such aid included
offensive weapons and sharing intelligence with the Ukrainian military. Ukrainian President
Volodymyr Zelenskyy has repeatedly sent thanks to American leaders for the supporters.

In the 2022 State of the Union Address, which was attended by Ukrainian Ambassador Oksana
Markarova, U.S. President Joe Biden heavily criticized the invasion and pledged American support
for Ukraine. American public opinion also heavily shifted towards supporting Ukraine following
the invasion.

In May 2022, the U.S. Senate confirmed Bridget Brink to serve as ambassador to coincide with the
reopening of the US embassy in Kyiv after it had closed due to the invasion.


During the Ukrainian independence movement, on August 1, 1991, then-U.S.-President
George H. W. Bush made a speech critical of the movement which James Carafano subsequently
described as "what may have been the worst speech ever by an American chief executive".

On 18 February 2009 the Verkhovna Rada of Crimea sent a letter to the Cabinet of Ministers of
Ukraine and the President of Ukraine in which it stated that it deemed it inexpedient to open a
representative office of the United States in Crimea and it urged the Ukrainian leadership to
give up this idea. The letter will also be sent to the Chairman of the UN General Assembly. The
letter was passed in a 77 to 9 roll-call vote with one abstention.

In 2012 the United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations passed Resolution 466, calling
for the unconditional release of political prisoner Yulia Tymoshenko and implemented a visa ban
against those responsible. The resolution condemned the administration of Ukrainian President
Viktor Yanukovych (in office: 2010–2014) and asked NATO to suspend all cooperative agreements with
Ukraine. In response, First Deputy General Prosecutor of Ukraine Renat Kuzmin wrote a letter to
U.S. President Barack Obama, complaining that his visa was revoked.

The Euromaidan protests resulted in the election of the pro-EU president Petro Poroshenko and
then the Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation in 2014. Poroshenko requested military
aid from the United States. President Barack Obama was reluctant to arm a relatively corrupt
military that was recently used against anti-democracy protestors, and saw the mistaken shoot-down
of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 by Russian-armed separatists as an example of the dangers of
supplying arms to Ukraine. Though the U.S. had sanctioned Russia and refused to recognize
the annexation, after a year Obama declined to provide the requested lethal aid (such as FGM-148
Javelin anti-tank missiles and F-16 fighter jets. The Obama administration did supply $600
million of non-lethal military aid from 2014 to 2016, including vehicles, training, body armor
 and night-vision goggles.

In 2017, President Donald Trump approved $47 million of Javelin anti-tank missile and missile
launchers; these were not allowed to be deployed but kept in storage as a strategic deterrent
against Russian invasion.

In 2018 the U.S. House of Representatives passed a provision blocking any training of Azov
Battalion of the Ukrainian National Guard by American forces, citing its neo-Nazi background.
In previous years, between 2014 and 2017, the U.S. House of Representatives passed amendments
banning support of Azov, but due to pressure from the Pentagon, the amendments were quietly
lifted.

On April 25, 2018, 57 members of the House of Representatives, led by Ro Khanna, released a
condemnation of Holocaust distortion in Ukraine. They criticized Ukraine's 2015 memory
laws glorifying Ukrainian Insurgent Army (UPA) and its leaders, such as Roman Shukhevych.
The condemnation came in an open bipartisan letter to Deputy Secretary of State John Sullivan.

In summer 2019, Trump froze $400 million in military aid to Ukraine which had been approved by
Congress, an aid package which was the subject of a phone conversation that Trump had with
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy on July 25. On August 12, 2019, an anonymous
whistleblower submitted a complaint to U.S. Inspector General Michael Atkinson that stated that
Trump had allegedly attempted to pressure Zelenskyy into launching an investigation on former U.S.
Vice President Joe Biden and his son, Hunter, during the phone call. On September 24, 2019,
the United States House of Representatives initiated an impeachment inquiry against Trump.
Trump held a meeting with Zelenskyy in New York City on September 25 where both presidents stated
that Zelenskyy had not been pressured during the July phone call and that nothing out of the
ordinary had occurred. Trump was impeached by the House, but later acquitted in the Senate
trial and continued as President until the end of his term.

From May 2019 to May 2022 the USA did not have an ambassador to Ukraine.