Chocolate is a food made from roasted and ground cacao seed kernels that is available as a liquid,
solid, or paste, either on its own or as a flavoring agent in other foods. Cacao has been consumed
in some form since at least the Olmec civilization (19th-11th century BCE), and the majority
of Mesoamerican people ─ including the Maya and Aztecs ─ made chocolate beverages.

The seeds of the cacao tree have an intense bitter taste and must be fermented to develop the
flavor. After fermentation, the seeds are dried, cleaned, and roasted. The shell is removed to
produce cocoa nibs, which are then ground to cocoa mass, unadulterated chocolate in rough form.
Once the cocoa mass is liquefied by heating, it is called chocolate liquor. The liquor may also
be cooled and processed into its two components: cocoa solids and cocoa butter. Baking chocolate,
also called bitter chocolate, contains cocoa solids and cocoa butter in varying proportions,
without any added sugar. Powdered baking cocoa, which contains more fiber than cocoa butter, can
be processed with alkali to produce dutch cocoa. Much of the chocolate consumed today is in the
form of sweet chocolate, a combination of cocoa solids, cocoa butter or added vegetable oils, and
sugar. Milk chocolate is sweet chocolate that additionally contains milk powder or condensed milk.
White chocolate contains cocoa butter, sugar, and milk, but no cocoa solids.

Chocolate is one of the most popular food types and flavors in the world, and many foodstuffs
involving chocolate exist, particularly desserts, including cakes, pudding, mousse, chocolate
brownies, and chocolate chip cookies. Many candies are filled with or coated with sweetened
chocolate. Chocolate bars, either made of solid chocolate or other ingredients coated in chocolate,
are eaten as snacks. Gifts of chocolate molded into different shapes (such as eggs, hearts, coins)
are traditional on certain Western holidays, including Christmas, Easter, Valentine's Day, and
Hanukkah. Chocolate is also used in cold and hot beverages, such as chocolate milk and hot
chocolate, and in some alcoholic drinks, such as creme de cacao.

Although cocoa originated in the Americas, West African countries, particularly Côte d'Ivoire and
Ghana, are the leading producers of cocoa in the 21st century, accounting for some 60% of the world
cocoa supply.

With some two million children involved in the farming of cocoa in West Africa, child slavery and
trafficking associated with the cocoa trade remain major concerns. A 2018 report argued that
international attempts to improve conditions for children were doomed to failure because of
persistent poverty, absence of schools, increasing world cocoa demand, more intensive farming of
cocoa, and continued exploitation of child labor.

Chocolate has been prepared as a drink for nearly all of its history. For example, one vessel
found at an Olmec archaeological site on the Gulf Coast of Veracruz, Mexico, dates chocolate's
preparation by pre-Olmec peoples as early as 1750 BC. On the Pacific coast of Chiapas, Mexico,
a Mokaya archaeological site provides evidence of cocoa beverages dating even earlier to 1900 BC.
The residues and the kind of vessel in which they were found indicate the initial use of cocoa was
not simply as a beverage, but the white pulp around the cocoa beans was likely used as a source of
fermentable sugars for an alcoholic drink.

Aztec. Man Carrying a Cacao Pod, 1440–1521. Volcanic stone, traces of red pigment. Brooklyn Museum
An early Classic-period (460–480 AD) Maya tomb from the site in Rio Azul had vessels with the Maya
glyph for cocoa on them with residue of a chocolate drink, suggests the Maya were drinking
chocolate around 400 AD. Documents in Maya hieroglyphs stated chocolate was used for ceremonial
purposes in addition to everyday life. The Maya grew cacao trees in their backyards and used
the cocoa seeds the trees produced to make a frothy, bitter drink.

By the 15th century, the Aztecs had gained control of a large part of Mesoamerica and had adopted
cocoa into their culture. They associated chocolate with Quetzalcoatl, who, according to one legend,
was cast away by the other gods for sharing chocolate with humans, and identified its
extrication from the pod with the removal of the human heart in sacrifice. In contrast to the
Maya, who liked their chocolate warm, the Aztecs drank it cold, seasoning it with a broad variety
of additives, including the petals of the Cymbopetalum penduliflorum tree, chile pepper, allspice,
vanilla, and honey.

The Aztecs were unable to grow cocoa themselves, as their home in the Mexican highlands was
unsuitable for it, so chocolate was a luxury imported into the empire. Those who lived in
areas ruled by the Aztecs were required to offer cocoa seeds in payment of the tax they deemed
"tribute". Cocoa beans were often used as currency. For example, the Aztecs used a system
in which one turkey cost 100 cocoa beans and one fresh avocado was worth three beans.

The Maya and Aztecs associated cocoa with human sacrifice, and chocolate drinks specifically with
sacrificial human blood. The Spanish royal chronicler Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés
described a chocolate drink he had seen in Nicaragua in 1528, mixed with achiote: "because those
people are fond of drinking human blood, to make this beverage seem like blood, they add a little
achiote, so that it then turns red. ... and part of that foam is left on the lips and around the
mouth, and when it is red for having achiote, it seems a horrific thing, because it seems like
blood itself."

Until the 16th century, no European had ever heard of the popular drink from the Central American
peoples. Christopher Columbus and his son Ferdinand encountered the cocoa bean on Columbus's
fourth mission to the Americas on 15 August 1502, when he and his crew stole a large native canoe
that proved to contain cocoa beans among other goods for trade. Spanish conquistador Hernán
Cortés may have been the first European to encounter it, as the frothy drink was part of the
after-dinner routine of Montezuma. José de Acosta, a Spanish Jesuit missionary who lived in
Peru and then Mexico in the later 16th century, wrote of its growing influence on the Spaniards.

Although bananas are more profitable, cocoa is more highly esteemed in Mexico. . . Cocoa is a
smaller fruit than almonds and thicker, which toasted do not taste bad. It is so prized among
the Indians and even among Spaniards. . . because since it is a dried fruit it can be stored
for a long time without deterioration, and they brings ships loaded with them from the province
of Guatemala. . . It also serves as currency, because with five cocoas you can buy one thing, with
thirty another, and with a hundred something else, without there being contradiction; and they
give these cocoas as alms to the poor who beg for them. The principal product of this cocoa is
a concoction which they make that they call “chocolate,” which is a crazy thing treasured in that
land, and those who are not accustomed are disgusted by it, because it has a foam on top and a
bubbling like that of feces, which certainly takes a lot to put up with. Anyway, it is the prized
beverage which the Indians offer to nobles who come to or pass through their lands; and the
Spaniards, especially Spanish women born in those lands die for black chocolate. This
aforementioned chocolate is said to be made in various forms and temperaments, hot, cold, and
lukewarm. They are wont to use spices and much chili; they also make it into a paste, and it is
said that it is a medicine to treat coughs, the stomach, and colds. Whatever may be the case, in
fact those who have not been reared on this opinion are not appetized by it.

While Columbus had taken cocoa beans with him back to Spain, chocolate made no impact until
Spanish friars introduced it to the Spanish court.After the Spanish conquest of the Aztecs,
chocolate was imported to Europe. There, it quickly became a court favorite. It was still served
as a beverage, but the Spanish added sugar, as well as honey (the original sweetener used by the
Aztecs for chocolate), to counteract the natural bitterness. Vanilla, another indigenous
American introduction, was also a popular additive, with pepper and other spices sometimes used to
give the illusion of a more potent vanilla flavor. Unfortunately, these spices tended to unsettle
the European constitution; the Encyclopédie states, "The pleasant scent and sublime taste it
imparts to chocolate have made it highly recommended; but a long experience having shown that
it could potentially upset one's stomach", which is why chocolate without vanilla was sometimes
referred to as "healthy chocolate". By 1602, chocolate had made its way from Spain to Austria.
By 1662, Pope Alexander VII had declared that religious fasts were not broken by consuming
chocolate drinks. Within about a hundred years, chocolate established a foothold throughout Europe.

The new craze for chocolate brought with it a thriving slave market, as between the early 1600s
and late 1800s, the laborious and slow processing of the cocoa bean was manual. Cocoa
plantations spread, as the English, Dutch, and French colonized and planted. With the depletion
of Mesoamerican workers, largely to disease, cocoa production was often the work of poor wage
laborers and African slaves. Wind-powered and horse-drawn mills were used to speed production,
augmenting human labor. Heating the working areas of the table-mill, an innovation that emerged
in France in 1732, also assisted in extraction.

New processes that sped the production of chocolate emerged early in the Industrial Revolution.
In 1815, Dutch chemist Coenraad van Houten introduced alkaline salts to chocolate, which reduced
its bitterness. A few years thereafter, in 1828, he created a press to remove about half the
natural fat (cocoa butter) from chocolate liquor, which made chocolate both cheaper to produce and
more consistent in quality. This innovation introduced the modern era of chocolate.

Known as "Dutch cocoa", this machine-pressed chocolate was instrumental in the transformation of
chocolate to its solid form when, in 1847, English chocolatier Joseph Fry discovered a way to make
chocolate moldable when he mixed the ingredients of cocoa powder and sugar with melted cocoa butter.
Subsequently, his chocolate factory, Fry's of Bristol, England, began mass-producing chocolate
bars, Fry's Chocolate Cream, launched in 1866, and they became very popular. Milk had
sometimes been used as an addition to chocolate beverages since the mid-17th century, but in
1875 Swiss chocolatier Daniel Peter invented milk chocolate by mixing a powdered milk developed
by Henri Nestlé with the liquor. In 1879, the texture and taste of chocolate was further
improved when Rudolphe Lindt invented the conching machine.

Besides Nestlé, several notable chocolate companies had their start in the late 19th and early
20th centuries. Rowntree's of York set up and began producing chocolate in 1862, after buying out
the Tuke family business. Cadbury was manufacturing boxed chocolates in England by 1868.
Manufacturing their first Easter egg in 1875, Cadbury created the modern chocolate Easter egg
after developing a pure cocoa butter that could easily be molded into smooth shapes. In 1893,
Milton S. Hershey purchased chocolate processing equipment at the World's Columbian Exposition in
Chicago, and soon began the career of Hershey's chocolates with chocolate-coated caramels.

The Baker Chocolate Company, which makes Baker's Chocolate, is the oldest producer of chocolate in
the United States. In 1765 Dr. James Baker and John Hannon founded the company in Boston. Using
cocoa beans from the West Indies, the pair built their chocolate business, which is still in
operation.


Cocoa, pronounced by the Olmecs as kakawa, dates to 1000 BC or earlier. The word "chocolate"
entered the English language from Spanish in about 1600. The word entered Spanish from the
word chocolātl in Nahuatl, the language of the Aztecs. The origin of the Nahuatl word is
uncertain, as it does not appear in any early Nahuatl source, where the word for chocolate
drink is cacahuatl, "cocoa water". It is possible that the Spaniards coined the word (perhaps
in order to avoid caca, a vulgar Spanish word for "faeces") by combining the Yucatec Mayan word
chocol, "hot", with the Nahuatl word atl, "water". A widely cited proposal is that the derives
from unattested xocolatl meaning "bitter drink" is unsupported; the change from x- to ch- is
unexplained, as is the -l-. Another proposed etymology derives it from the word chicolatl,
meaning "beaten drink", which may derive from the word for the frothing stick, chicoli.
Other scholars reject all these proposals, considering the origin of first element of the name
to be unknown. The term "chocolatier", for a chocolate confection maker, is attested from
1888.